Number 12-3, Moses was by far the meekest of all men.
Now, when we analyze our own personality,
how many of us zero in on meekness?
That might not be the first quality that comes to mind.
We may think that it's a rather benign, innocent,
maybe even inconsequential.
We think, you know, I have other bigger issues I need to deal with first.
I need to work on being more courageous and partial,
loving, forgiving, discerning,
and a whole list of other qualities might come to mind.
Well, meekness might sound benign and inconsequential.
In reality, it is a very complex quality and quite diverse.
A police find Exodus chapter 2 was Moses born meek, sweet, and complete?
No, there's no indication that meekness is an innate quality.
Now, it's true at Exodus 2.2, it does say that when he was born, Moses was beautiful.
But it does not say he was meek.
And when you think about it, Moses was raised in the arrogant,
haughty family of Pharaoh, the world renowned leader at that time.
He was not taught to be meek during his adolescent years.
So what do we learn thus far?
It's actually encouraging.
We do not have to be born with meek genes or a predisposition to meekness
in order to attain that quality.
And we don't have to have the perfect upbringing to cultivate meekness
with time and patience all of us can attain that quality.
Now, Moses came described as by far, by far, the meekest of all men.
He was in a category all by himself.
Well, how did that happen?
Well, he was actually coached and trained personally by Jehovah.
And Jehovah obviously saw the potential in Moses and some of those qualities
he might have developed in his upbringing in Pharaoh's house,
dignity, confidence, sometimes overconfidence, poise.
But all those acquired gifts Jehovah could not use him to his maximum potential
until until he cultivated meekness.
And this was not a 40-day curriculum.
It was a 40-year lesson of contemplation and cultivating humility.
He was just a shepherd and not even of his own sheep.
It was his father and my sheep.
But with his changed situation and having some time on his hands,
he was now able to contemplate the type of man he was and the type of God he served.
And he changed.
He developed this quality of meekness.
Now, the inside book describes meekness this way.
And you'll see it is a complex quality.
It says it's a madness of temper without hotiness or vanity.
The mental disposition that enables one to endure injury with patience
and without irritation, resentment, or vindictive retaliation.
Now, that's a tall order, isn't it?
You know, one watchtower described meekness as a piece of artwork painted by a skilled artist.
Now, you look at the artwork there.
It's beautiful.
Moses' development of meekness was so beautiful to Jehovah that he was make sure it was put under the spotlight
by far the meekest of all men.
Well, what's the point of similarity between a piece of artwork and meekness?
Well, the artist has to blend colors together, definitely skillfully,
a variety of colors come together.
For example, of those three primary colors on a color where it's red, yellow, and blue.
Well, by mixing these colors together, an artist can paint a beautiful, tranquil painting.
And as you see in the image of the secondary colors, if you mix red and yellow together,
what color do you see between them?
It's orange.
If you mix yellow and blue together, what color do you see then?
You see green.
And if you mix red and blue together, it produces violet or purple.
Well, the artist further mixes colors together and he can get all the hues necessary
to paint a beautiful, tranquil scene.
Well, what's the point of similarity?
Meekness is not one color.
It's not just one quality.
It's blending many different qualities together in a skilled fashion.
To achieve meekness, it requires we mix together various virtues like humility,
loneliness of mind, gentleness, patience, a mildness of temper, long suffering.
And like an artist, if we work on all those qualities simultaneously,
the result is this beautiful masterpiece that we call meekness.
Please turn out to Numbers 12.
We're going to reason on verse 3 from a different aspect.
And so there it is, verse 3 again.
The man Moses was by far the meekest of all men on the face of the earth.
So leave your Bible open there for a moment.
Question, who wrote those words?
Well, those were Moses' own words.
And so some commentators have criticized this saying that this was unjustified self-praise.
Someone like a person who says of himself, I'm humble and I'm proud of it.
Well, let's look at the context first here.
Situation is described in Numbers 12, 1 and 2.
Moses's sister and brother challenged his authority as the official spokesman for Jehovah.
And Miriam was listed first in this mutiny.
She was the oldest of the three siblings. Moses was the youngest.
And it's apparent that Miriam was the instigator,
because if he glanced down there in verse 10 of the two, she was the only one struck with leprosy.
And remember, meekness, the definition, part of it was, endure injury with patience without irritation, resentment, or retaliation.
So Moses absorbed this withering, blistering, provocation, meekly.
And now look at the end of verse 2.
But Jehovah was listening.
So Jehovah was right there.
He saw and heard the level of vehemence.
Well, what was Moses' relationship with Jehovah, verse 8?
Face to face, I speak to him openly, not by riddles.
And the appearance of Jehovah is what he sees.
Well, we understand, of course, that this was through an angel.
But Moses had this two-way communication directly with Jehovah.
In fact, inside had a significant statement, I thought, it said,
that Moses had a more direct, constant, and intimate relationship with Jehovah than did any other prophet prior to Jesus Christ.
Now that's quite a statement, isn't it? And think about it.
When Jesus came, he superseded Moses' status.
Because at that point, Jesus became by far the meekest man that ever walked the earth.
But what did Jesus say about himself at Matthew 1129?
He said, I'm mild-tempered and lowly of heart, meekness.
Well, was that unjustified self-praise on his part?
No, it was unvarnished truth.
And it's similar with Moses the way he described himself.
It's true he penned the words, but we must never forget those were not his words.
He was inspired by God. He was the meekest of all men.
Was he perfect in this quality? No.
We all recall the rash action on his part when he struck the rock to bring forth water
and the credit for the miracle he took away from Jehovah, applied to himself.
Well, that was a huge mistake that Moses regretted for the rest of his life.
And Jehovah took the insult seriously, did not allow him to enter the promised plan.
But how did Jehovah view Moses after that?
I find Deuteronomy 3410.
Moses was still viewed by Jehovah as the finest example of all men.
And 3410 says, but there has never, again, arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses
whom Jehovah knew face to face, complimentary lying about Moses.
Who wrote Deuteronomy? Moses.
But in this case, these were not his words pinned down.
He had already died, you see, in verse 5 there.
And so, insight attributes these final inspired words of the book to Joshua,
the writer of the next book of the Bible.
So, meekness is a complex and beautiful quality that we can strive to more fully achieve.